Microdroplet formation is an emerging area of research due to its wide-ranging applications within microfluidic based lab-on-a-chip devices. Our goal is to understand the dynamics of droplet formation in a microfluidic T-junction in order to optimize the operation of the microfluidic device. Understanding of this process forms the basis of many potential applications: synthesis of new materials, formulation of products in pharmaceutical, cosmetics and food industries. The two-phase level set method, which is ideally suited for tracking the interfaces between two immiscible fluids, has been used to perform numerical simulations of droplet formation in a T-junction. Numerical predictions compare well with experimental observations. The influence of parameters such as flow rate ratio, capillary number, viscosity ratio and the interfacial tension between the two immiscible fluids is known to affect the physical processes of droplet generation. In this study the effects of surface wettability, which can be controlled by altering the contact angle, are investigated systematically. As competitive wetting between liquids in a two-phase flow can give rise to erratic flow patterns, it is often desirable to minimize this phenomenon as it can lead to a disruption of the regular production of uniform droplets. The numerical simulations predicted that wettability effects on droplet length are more prominent when the viscosity ratio λ (the quotient of the viscosity of the dispersed phase with the viscosity of the continuous phase) is O(1), compared to the situation when λ is O(0.1). The droplet size becomes independent of contact angle in the superhydrophobic regime for all capillary numbers. At a given value of interfacial tension, the droplet length is greater when λ is O(1) compared to the case when λ is O(0.1). The increase in droplet length with interfacial tension, σ, is a function of lnσ with the coefficients of the regression curves depending on the viscosity ratio. © 2011 Elsevier Ltd.
