© 2017, American Phytopathological Society. All rights reserved. In 2016, in the western part of Poland (the Wielkopolska region), virus-like disease symptoms were observed in greenhouse grown cucumbers (Cucumis sativus). Plants were often stunted and displayed symptoms of mottled areas of light and dark green on the leaves, mosaics, and blotches. Fruits were reduced in size and number and showed similar symptoms to those observed on the leaves. During the spring and summer period, 40 samples of cucumber plants were collected and tested at the Plant Disease Clinic of the Institute of Plant Protection - National Research Institute in Poznań. Initially, leaf sap was examined by transmission electron microscopy and rigid rod-shaped particles of 15 × 300 nm were observed. Then, all samples were tested using double-antibody sandwich (DAS)-ELISA with commercial antisera against CGMMV (07022S) (Sauerlach, Germany), giving positive results. To confirm the presence of CGMMV, the total RNA was isolated, and the region encompassing genes encoding movement and coat proteins were amplified by RT-PCR using CGMMV-F5370 and CGMMV-R6390 primers (†). RT-PCR products of approximately 976 bp were obtained in all tested samples. The RT-PCR products were gel excised, purified, cloned, and sequenced. The obtained nucleotide sequences were analyzed using bioinformatics software and compared with sequences available in GenBank. The analysis revealed that all sequences were identical, and one representative was deposited in GenBank under accession nos. KX589256 and KX589257 (movement and coat protein, respectively). The homology of CGMMV sequences may suggest the common source of infection. BLAST analysis showed that the sequence was 99% identical to the MP and CP region of CGMMV isolates reported from Russia (strains: MC-1, FJ848666.1; VIROG43M, GQ495275.1 and MC-2, GQ495274.1), and from Spain (strain SP isolate Alm08 GQ411361.1). To our knowledge, this is the first report of CGMMV infecting greenhouse cucumber in Poland. CGMMV is a member of the genus Tobamovirus, which causes severe yield and quality losses of cucurbit crops worldwide. The rapid spread of CGMMV in cucumbers in Canada has led to a serious decline ranging from 10 to 15% (†). The virus has also been reported in Europe, Asia, the Middle East, some parts of the U.S.A. (†), and Australia (†). The virus is easily transmitted mechanically in cucurbits (watermelon, cucumber, melons, zucchini, pumpkin, squash, bitter gourd, and bottle gourd). It can be spread via cucumber pollen and by infected seeds. The seed transmission rates ranged from 16.7 to 100% (†). The virus can be introduced into a crop in many ways, but contaminated seeds and soil are the most common ones. Damage by this virus has been reported in regions where CGMMV is present, for example, with 10 to 15% losses reported in Canada (†); however, the virus might be much more severe in warm climates. These findings have important implications for disease management of CGMMV.
