© 2018 Chinese Physical Society. Applying the active control of electric field to the preparation of micro-droplets via the traditional microfluidic technology has attracted great attention because it can effectively improve the controllability of the preparing process. Therefore, a full understanding of mechanism for the regulation and control of microdroplets's generation by the microfluidic technology and electric field will provide interesting possibilities for the active control of producing required microdroplets in the practical applications. A transient theoretical model is developed via the coupling of phase-field method and electrostatic model to numerically investigate the generation of the single-phase droplets in a co-flow microfluidic device under the control of a uniform direct-current electric field. Via the numerical simulations based on the transient model, the control mechanisms of the electric field on dynamic behaviors of the droplets generation are revealed, and the influences of flow and electric parameters on the droplets generation characteristics are elucidated. The results indicate that the electrostatic field is able to generate an electric field force toward the inner phase fluid in the normal direction of the interface between two-phase fluids with different electric parameters. The electric field force enhances the necking and breaking of the inner fluid interface, which accelerates the droplets' generation, increases droplet deformation degree, and reduces droplet size. As the electric capillary number increases under the same hydrodynamic capillary number, the droplet formation pattern is transformed from dripping regime with only a single droplet formed per cycle to another dripping regime with one main droplet formed together with the following satellite droplets per cycle. In addition, according to the numerical results in this work, we organize a regime diagram to quantitatively represent the respective regime of these two flow patterns as a function of hydrodynamic capillary number and electric capillary number. The regime diagram indicates that with the increase in hydrodynamic capillary number and electric capillary number, the viscous drag force and electric field force are strengthened, which induces the formation of a slender liquid thread of inner fluid at the later stage of the necking process. This contributes to triggering the Rayleigh-Plateau instability on the liquid thread of inner fluid, and thus facilitating the generation of satellite droplets via the breakup of the liquid thread.
