© 2019 European Association of Geoscientists and Engineers, EAGE. All Rights Reserved.We investigate the challenges involved in the use of polymer flooding as a chemical enhanced oil recovery (cEOR) technique for improving mobility ratio and enhancing macroscopic sweep efficiency. Flexible coiled polymers in porous media undergo stretching in a spatially heterogeneous structure. Due to the viscoelasticity of these polymers, they stretch continuously depending on their previous deformation until their elastic limit is reached and relaxation occurs. Previous research has proposed that at a certain critical flow rate, the relaxation of polymers cause an increase in viscosity and in turn a better mobility for enhancing microscopic sweep in porous media. However, others have reported that the increased viscosity in porous media is not so much related to the elasticity but more on the normal stresses that occur when polymers are sheared in porous media flow. One similar fact is that as increased viscosity is observed an enhanced pressured drop occurs and the flow becomes highly unstable even at laminar flow regime. This unstable flow is termed the elastic instability or turbulence but the details of this kind of turbulence, its consequences and applicability on the impact of oil recovery is not understood. In this work, we experimentally investigate the flow behaviors of flexible coiled polymers of hydrolyzed polyacrylamide (HPAM) based on a single pore throat geometry using a microfluidic device. The aim is to adequately parameterize the effects of the normal stress difference in shear and extension as a function of the geometry and intrinsic characteristics of the polymer solutions at different Deborah (De) numbers. Hence, we carry out pressure drop and particle image velocimetry experiments and results showed a critical De at which polymer viscosity increases as well as the normal stress difference. It was also observed that the flow resistance might be a function of both the elasticity and the normal stresses in shear flow, however, extensional stresses cannot be neglected.
