© 2019 The American Phytopathological Society.The influence of environmental and management factors on the occurrence of foliar pathogens of watermelon was analyzed using surveysampling data collected from commercial farms in South Carolina in spring 2015 and spring and fall 2016. A stratified two-stage cluster sampling design was used to sample symptomatic watermelon leaves from 56 fields of 27 growers in seven counties representing the main watermelon-producing areas in the state. In the sampling design, counties corresponded to strata, growers to first-stage clusters, and fields to second-stage clusters. Pathogens were identified on 100 leaves collected per field based on reproductive structures that formed on the leaves. Information about previous crops, fruit type, field size, transplanting date, first harvest date, and fungicides applied within 7 days and within 7 to 14 days prior to sampling was obtained from growers. Field alignment was determined with a compass. Survey-specific logistic regression procedures were used to analyze the effect of these factors on the probabilities of pathogen occurrence. Five fungal pathogens, Stagonosporopsis spp., Podosphaera xanthii, Cercospora citrullina, Colletotrichum orbiculare, and Myrothecium sensu lato (s.l.), and the oomycete Pseudoperonospora cubensis were included in the analyses. Among the factors we analyzed, there was a consistent increased probability of occurrence of Stagonosporopsis spp. in fields with a previous cucurbit crop, increasing probabilities of pathogen occurrence with increasing plant age, a lower probability of occurrence of some pathogens on triploid cultivars compared with diploid cultivars, and a decrease in probability of pathogen occurrence in fields aligned toward southwest or west. Application of fungicides significantly reduced the probability of observing C. citrullina, P. cubensis, and Stagonosporopsis spp. in 2015 and P. xanthii in spring 2016. This study emphasizes the importance of crop rotation and fungicide applications to manage foliar diseases of watermelon, particularly gummy stem blight, powdery mildew, and downy mildew. Crop age, cultivar type, and field alignment also were found to significantly influence the probability of pathogen occurrence. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study examining the influence of various factors on foliar pathogens of watermelon with data collected from commercial fields.
