© 2014 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved. This chapter reports two sets of experimental investigations on the droplet formation and size manipulation of nanofluids in the microfluidic T-junction and flow focusing geometries which are commonly used in droplet-based microfluidics. In addition to studying the temperature dependence of droplet formation at both geometries, effect of other factors such as presence of nanoparticles in aqueous fluid, depth of microchannel and flow rate on the droplet formation and size manipulation are investigated. Nanofluids used in these microfluidics devices were prepared by dispersing spherical and cylindrical shaped TiO2 nanoparticles in deionized water. In order to identify the effect of temperature on the droplet formation, all microfluidic devices were fabricated with integrated microheaters. Temperature dependence of interfacial tension and viscosity of these nanofluids are also characterized as these properties play major role in droplet generation and flow in microfluidic systems. These nanofluids were found to exhibit substantially smaller oilbased interfacial tension and insignificantly higher viscosity than those of their base fluid and the viscosity of all fluids decreases with increasing temperature. Results of droplet formation in microfluidic T-junction revealed that nanofluids generate different droplet size than the base fluid and the temperature has significant effect on the droplet formation process. Nanofluids showed different characteristics in droplet formation and size control with the temperature. Except nanofluids containing cylindrical-shaped nanoparticles, the droplet size was found to increase with increasing temperature. For instance, addition of spherical-shaped TiO2 nanoparticles in deionized water resulted in much smaller droplet size compared to the cylindrically shaped nanoparticles. This indicates that shape of dispersed nanoparticle influences the droplet formation as well as the droplet size. The depth of the channel also influences the droplet formation. From the investigations of nanofluids in flow focusing geometry three different droplet breakup regimes and their transition capillary numbers as well as temperatures were identified. The heat generated by the integrated microheater changed the droplet formation process as increasing temperature significantly enlarged the size of the droplets. Results demonstrated that these nanofluids possess similar characteristics in droplet formation at different temperatures and any small change in the flow rate has little impact on the size of the droplets formed in this geometry.
