© 2019 The Author(s).Background: Zimbabwe conducts Malaria Indicator Surveys after 3 years and Demographic and Health Surveys to track the impact of malaria interventions. The last one to be conducted was in 2016 and had set an aim aimed to collect data to track malaria indicators as well as to save as the baseline source for the Malaria Strategic Plan (2016-2020). Methods: Malaria Indicator Survey-2016 utilized the frame of enumeration areas (EAs) from the Zimbabwe Master Sample (ZMS12) created after the 2012 population census for each of the survey districts. The design for the survey was a representative probability sample to produce estimates at national level for the respective domains, which are the forty-four malaria-endemic districts. Survey teams comprised of Ministry of Health personnel who administered the standard questionnaire (adapted to country setting) to respondents within sampled EAs, performed RDT, anaemia test, prepared microscopic slide and collected DBS and data analysis of collected information was analysed. Microscopic slides examined centrally at the National Institute of Health Research. Results: The overall protection coverage by at least one major vector control measure, IRS and/or Nets, was 82.5%. Use of nets among high-risk groups 32.5% For children under five and 24.5% for pregnant women. LLIN utilization quite low taking into consideration the net ownership per household, which was 58% for the general population. Moreover, IPTp coverage has remained almost unchanged since the 2012 MIS, with only a third of pregnant women receiving at least two doses of IPTp. Malaria prevalence appears to be on the decline with 2016 MIS recording 0.2% compared to 0.4% as of 2012 MIS. Plasmodium falciparum remains the predominant parasite species in the country at 98%. Conclusion: The results indicated that some progress has been made in malaria control although there is still subsequent low malaria risk perception that comes with the reduced prevalence. It has been shown that there is low use of interventions shown by the low use of LLINs by vulnerable groups like pregnant women and children under five.
