© 2017, American Phytopathological Society. All rights reserved.In October 2016, yellowing and leaf deformation symptoms were observed in Datura innoxia plants in Kharthoum, Sudan. D. innoxia, an annual shrubby weed belonging to the Solanaceae, is native to Central and South America. This species has been introduced in Africa, Asia, Australia, and Europe, where it is considered an invasive species. Leaf samples from four symptomatic plants (DS1 to DS4) were collected (15.611307°N, 32.544277°E) and dried until analysis. To investigate the presence of begomoviruses (genus Begomovirus, family Geminiviridae) in the leaf samples, total nucleic acids were extracted using a CTAB-based method and used as a template for rolling-circle amplification (RCA) using φ29 DNA polymerase (TempliPhi kit, GE Healthcare). Subsequent digestion with a set of restriction endonucleases yielded similar restriction patterns for all samples. The BamHI and ClaI digestions yielded restriction fragments of ∼2.7 kbp from all samples. These fragments were isolated from sample DS3 and cloned into pBluescript II SK(+) (Stratagene). Two clones were selected and sequenced (Macrogen, Seoul, South Korea). Initial BLAST analysis showed that the obtained sequences of 2,753 nt (DS3-B1, cloned using BamHI, GenBank accession no. KY488568) and 2,757 nt (DS3-C1, cloned using ClaI, KY488569) corresponded to DNA-A and DNA-B of a bipartite begomovirus, respectively. Both DNA components were aligned with those sequences identified by BLAST analysis using MUSCLE (†) and identity percentages were calculated with SDT (sequence demarcation tool) (†). Cloned DNA-A and DNA-B showed the highest nucleotide identity (97.2 and 95.7%, respectively) with a Watermelon chlorotic stunt virus (WmCSV) isolate (AJ245650 and AJ245651) previously reported infecting watermelon in Sudan (†). In accordance with the current taxonomic criterion for begomovirus species demarcation (†), the begomovirus identified in this investigation is an isolate of WmCSV. PCR was performed with Taq polymerase (BIOTAQ, Bioline) using specific primers whose design was based on the cloned DNA-A of WmCSV, MA2477(+) (5’-CTTTCGGTGTATGCTAGCTGTCAAG-3’) and MA2478(-) (5’-GACCCATATGGACGACGATCACG-3’). DNA fragments of the expected size (562 bp) were amplified from the four samples and were shown to have a nucleotide identity of 99.4 to 100% with the cloned DNA-A of WmCSV, thus confirming the presence of this virus in all analyzed samples. To our knowledge, this is the first record of a Datura species as a natural host of WmCSV, highlighting the role it could play as a reservoir for the virus between cropping seasons. Although WmCSV typically infects cucurbits, our results and the report of infections on tomato from Jordan (†) pose the question whether it could be a threat to solanaceous crops in Sudan and the Middle East, where is widely spread.
