Particle concentration is a key unit operation in biochemical assays. Although there are many techniques for particle concentration in continuous-phase microfluidics, relatively few are available in multiphase (plug-based) microfluidics. Existing approaches generally require external electric or magnetic fields together with charged or magnetized particles. This paper reports a passive technique for particle concentration in water-in-oil plugs which relies on the interaction between particle sedimentation and the recirculating vortices inherent to plug flow in a cylindrical capillary. This interaction can be quantified using the Shields parameter (θ), a dimensionless ratio of a particle's drag force to its gravitational force, which scales with plug velocity. Three regimes of particle behavior are identified. When θ is less than the movement threshold (region I), particles sediment to the bottom of the plug where the internal vortices subsequently concentrate the particles at the rear of the plug. We demonstrate highly efficient concentration (~100%) of 38 μm glass beads in 500 μm diameter plugs traveling at velocities up to 5 mm/s. As θ is increased beyond the movement threshold (region II), particles are suspended in well-defined circulation zones which begin at the rear of the plug. The length of the zone scales linearly with plug velocity, and at sufficiently large θ, it spans the length of the plug (region III). A second effect, attributed to the co-rotating vortices at the rear cap, causes particle aggregation in the cap, regardless of flow velocity. Region I is useful for concentrating/collecting particles, while the latter two are useful for mixing the beads with the solution. Therefore, the two key steps of a bead-based assay, concentration and resuspension, can be achieved simply by changing the plug velocity. By exploiting an interaction of sedimentation and recirculation unique to multiphase flow, this simple technique achieves particle concentration without on-chip components, and could therefore be applied to a range of heterogeneous screening assays in discrete nl plugs. © 2012 American Institute of Physics.
