© 2018 American Physical Society. Why do particles, suspended in a fluid and traveling in a channel, deposit onto walls? The question has far-reaching implications in different domains (filtering, syringeability, fouling, etc.). Close to a channel wall, particles are subject to a variety of effects, which control their trajectories: hydrodynamic forces, diffusion, van der Waals adhesion forces, and electrostatic forces. The existing theories and phenomenologies, due to their inherent limitations, and the numerical and experimental studies, due to their scarcity, did not allow thus far to establish a general description of the deposition process. By coupling microfluidic experiments, theory, and numerics, we succeed in establishing a general description of the phenomenon. We discover that the problem is particularly rich. We show the existence of three regimes: van der Waals, Debye, and diffusive, each including various subregimes. Within each main regime, particle deposition is dominated respectively by (attractive) van der Waals forces, (repulsive) electrostatic forces, or diffusion. We establish the scaling laws governing the collector efficiency, S, in each regime. The ensemble of the regimes and their transitions can be displayed in diagrams. We focus on the case AkT∼1 (the case of most practical interest), in which the diagram involves two dimensionless numbers, P (incorporating the Debye layer characteristics) and ξL (a function of the flow speed, diffusion constant, and the geometry). In this case, the three main regimes organize around a cantilever beam, in which the vertical support is defined by the condition P=4e-2, and the horizontal beam is located at ξL=AkT, where A, k, and T are the Hamaker constant, the Boltzmann constant, and the absolute temperature, respectively. The present work allows understanding of empirical observations thus far left unexplained and provides a paradigm enabling engineering of devices in a way that reduces or enhances particle deposition.
