Accurate modeling of gas microflow is crucial for the microfluidic devices in MEMS. Gas microflows through these devices are often in the slip and transition flow regimes, characterized by the Knudsen number of the order of 10-2∼100. An increasing number of researchers now dedicate great attention to the developments in the modeling of non-equilibrium boundary conditions in the gas microflows, concentrating on the slip model. In this review, we present various slip models obtained from different theoretical, computational and experimental studies for gas microflows. Correct descriptions of the Knudsen layer effect are of critical importance in modeling and designing of gas microflow systems and in predicting their performances. Theoretical descriptions of the gas-surface interaction and gas-surface molecular interaction models are introduced to describe the boundary conditions. Various methods and techniques for determination of the slip coefficients are reviewed. The review presents the considerable success in the implementation of various slip boundary conditions to extend the Navier-Stokes (N-S) equations into the slip and transition flow regimes. Comparisons of different values and formulations of the first- and second-order slip coefficients and models reveal the discrepancies arising from different definitions in the first-order slip coefficient and various approaches to determine the second-order slip coefficient. In addition, no consensus has been reached on the correct and generalized form of higher-order slip expression. The influences of specific effects, such as effective mean free path of the gas molecules and viscosity, surface roughness, gas composition and tangential momentum accommodation coefficient, on the hybrid slip models for gas microflows are analyzed and discussed. It shows that although the various hybrid slip models are proposed from different viewpoints, they can contribute to N-S equations for capturing the high Knudsen number effects in the slip and transition flow regimes. Future studies are also discussed for improving the understanding of gas microflows and enabling us to exactly predict and actively control gas slip. © Springer-Verlag 2012.
